
ABBRIVIATIONS
    TCP:              Transmission Control Protocol
    UDP:              User Datagram Protocol
    WWW (80):         World Wide Web
    SNMP (25):        Simple Network Management Protocol
    TFTP (69):        Trivial File Transfer Protocol
    SMTP (161):       Simple Mail Transfer Protocol
    QoS:              Quality of Service
    URL:              Universal Resource locator

DEFINITIONS
    WWW:        Used by web browsers to access content on web servers
    DNS (53):   Resolves a hostname to an IP address
    SNMP:       Query, store and display information about a network (application layer)
    TFTP:       Used to transfer files between two machines (simpler then FTP (20))

    DHCP, TFTP, DNS and SNMP use UDP, other well known applications use TCP

COMMANDS


TRANSMISSION CONTROL PROTOCOL (TCP)
    Most common layer 4 protocol (RCF 793)
    Much more reliable protocol than UDP

        1. Error recovery               (retransmission of lost packets, uses sequence numbers and acknowledgements)
        2. Flow Control                 (Helps avoid congestion on the network, uses windowing to protect buffer space)
        3. Multiplexing using ports     (Allows receiving host to choose correct application data is destined for based on port number)
        4. Connection Establishment     (Handshake to start a communication session)
        5. Ordered Data transfer        (Received bytes will be in the same order they were sent in)

    TCP HEADER
        2 bytes:    source port
        2 bytes:    destination port
        4 bytes:    Sequence number
        4 bytes:    Acknowledgement number
        2 bytes:    Window size
        2 bytes:    Checksum
        6 bits:     TCP flags


USER DATAGRAM PROTOCOL (UDP)
    less common layer 4 protocol
    Faster protocol than TCP
        - VoIP and video over IP don't require error recovery so UDP suits them better

        1. No Error recovery
        2. No Flow Control
        3. No Connection Establishment
        4. No Ordered Data Transfer
        5. Multiplexing using Ports

    NOTE: UTP does not segment data into the correct size for transmission (needs to be handled by application layer)
    VoIP uses UDP since by the time a segment is recovered the conversation has progressed (UDP is used for real time transfers)
    UDP applications are not slowed waiting for acknowledgements


PORT MULTIPLEXING
    Relies on a concept called a socket which has:
        1. An IP address
        2. A Transport protocol (i.e. TCP)
        3. A port number

    Ports 1-1024 are reserved for well known applications
    Usually client dynamically assign a port number greater than 1024
    The destination port indicates which application receives the data contained in the segment
    The server then reply's with its own segment using the source port of the received segment as the destination port

    The same concepts allied to both UDP and TCP

ERROR RECOVERY
    The sending machine provides a sequence number in the header of each segment
    This sequence number marks the first byte in the segment
        - (i.e. The first segment would have sequence number 0, the second sequence number 1000. the third, sequence number 2000)
    The receiving machine reply's with an acknowledgement in the header for each segment received
    The acknowledgement number represents the next byte in the sequence to be received
        - (i.e. an acknowledgement of 4000 means the receiving machine has received 3,999 bytes and is ready for the segment with sequence number 4,000)
    The sending machine sets a timer for each segment sent. If an acknowledgement for that sequence is not received in time then the segment is resent

FLOW CONTROL
    The window field implies the maximum number of unacknowledged bytes that can be sent
    The window starts small and grows until errors occur
        Dynamic window - The size of the window changes over time (also called a sliding window)
    When the window is full the sender does not send. Controls the flow of data
    Once an acknowledgement is received a new window starts from that acknowledgement number
    Both sides of the communication will maintain their own windows

    IMPORTANT: Initial Window size is agreed upon during the 3 way handshake

CONNECTION ESTABLISHMENT AND TERMINATION
    TCP uses a three way handshake to establish a connection between two machines
        1. Client machine sends SYN (sequence number), destination port and source port
        2. Server replies with ACK (acknowledgement of sequence number received) and it's own SYN (sequence number), plus the source and destination port
        3. Client responds with an ACK (acknowledgement of the sequence number sent b the server)

    Now both the client and server have agreed on sequence numbers and can communicate
    2 bits in the TCP header (flags field) represent the SYN and ACK messages
        - If these bits are not set the sequence number or acknowledgement number will be ignored
        - The ACK is not set in the first segment since the sequence number has not been initialized yet

    Connection termination uses the same three way handshake but sets the FIN flag instead of the SYN flags
    These FIN segments must also be acknowledged so that both machines know the connection has been terminated

    Connection oriented protocol:   TCP
    Connectionless protocol:        UDP

ORDER DATA TRANSFER
    MTU (Maximum transmission unit)
        - 1500 bytes for Ethernet
        - Payload of TCP is 1460 since IP and TCP headers are 20 bytes each

    The TCP assembler reorders packets which arrive out of sequence due to retransmissions
        - This is done based on the sequence number


Quality of Service (QoS)
    modern networks need much more bandwidth with less delay

    REASONS FOR INCREASED NETWORK DEMAND
        - File Transfers (large data transfers over a long period of time)
        - Databases (Increase user demand for data)
        - Email
        - Internet

    VoIP
        Sends voice data (converted to a digital signal) over a network in IP packets

        REQUIREMENTS:
            - Small bandwidth     (about 30 kbps)
            - Low Delay           (less than 200 milliseconds)
            - Low Jitter          (Jitter is the variation in delay, should not be more than 30 milliseconds, voice sounds jumpy)
            - Low data loss       (Since data is not recovered, break in conversation)

      Video over IP is the same as voice over IP but requires very high bandwidth

WEBSERVERS
    https://www.cisco.com/the/webpage/path
        - https://              protocol used to connect to the web server (http, https, ftp)
        - www.cisco.com/        webserver hostname or IP address
        - the/webpase/path      Location of the webpage on the web server

HTTP (HYPER TEXT TRANSFER PROTOCOL)
    When a web browser loads a web page it first loads the requested page
        - That page may contain references to images or video
        - The Web browser (client) then sends GET requests for these objects aswell


NETWORK SECURITY

    TYPES OF ATTACK
        1. Denial of Server (DoS)
                - destroyers:       Erase data and software
                - crashers:         Cause hosts and switches to fail
                - flooders:         Flood network with packets to make network unusable

        2. Reconnaissance Attacks
                - Tries to discover information about a network (such as IP addresses)

        3. Access Attacks
                - An attempt to steal data

        A virus is a program that is transferred onto a target computer (i.e. through an email or download) designed to carry out one of these attacks
        Anti-virus software scans a computer for known viruses (continuously downloads the latest virus signatures)

    METHODS OF ATTACK
        1. Access from wireless LAN       User outside the building can access the network
        2. Infected mobile/laptop         laptop becomes infected while at home and is then connected to network
        3. Disgruntled employees          Steal information onto a USB

    ATTACK TOOLS
        1. Scanner              Send requests to TCP and UDP ports (NMAP)
        2. Spyware              Virus that tracks what the user does and passes the information back to the attacker through the internet
        3. Worm                 Self replicating program. Usually perform DoS attacks
        4. Keystroke Logger     Logs all keystroke a user makes to capture passwords
        5. Phishing             Attacker sets up a site that looks like a legitimate site
        6. Malware              Board term for viruses and spyware

    DEMILITARIZED ZONE (DMZ)
        Place for hosts inside the enterprise network that require access from the internet
        Keeps them separate from the rest of the enterprise network though a firewall

    FIREWALL
        Sits between a network and the internet
        Stops unwanted packets from entering the network from the Internet
        Uses the transport layer port number and the application layer header to detect unwanted packets
        Disallows all traffic except what the engineer has allowed ('opening a hole' in the firewall)

        Needs to know which interfaces are connected to the inside, outside and DMZ

    NETWORK ADMISSION CONTROL (NAC)
        Requires a user to supply and username and password before connecting to the LAN
        Requires that any connecting device have up to date antivirus software

    INTRUSTON DETECTION AND PREVENTION (IDS and IPS)
        Looks for trends to detect certain types of Attacks
            - i.e. a file being sent to many different hosts may suggest a worm copying itself

    VIRTUAL PRIVATE NETWORKS (VPNs)
        Send connections through the internet using a secure channel
            - Authenticate on both ends of the VPN so both client and server are sure who they are communicating with
            - Encrypt the original IP packets (end to end)

        Access VPN:           Home office laptop connecting to enterprise network
        site-to-site VPN:     Branch office connecting to main office
