
ABBREVIATIONS:

    SOHO: small office/home office
    ROMMON: ROM monitor OS

COMMANDS:
    show ip interface brief
    show interfaces <interface type> <interface number>
    show protocols <interface type> <interface number>      -> information about interfaces
    show controllers <interface type> <interface number>    -> On serial interfaces list cable as either DCE or DTE
    show version
    copy <source> <destination>
    show flash                                              -> lists the name and size of files in flash
    reload                                                  -> reloads (reboots) the router (startup-config and OS)

    bandwidth <kbps>                                        -> set the bandwidth for an interface
    clock rate <bps>                                        -> set the clock rate for an interface
    config-register <hex value>                             -> set the value of the configuration register (see below)
    boot system <file_url:filename>                         -> Set a boot command in the startup-config specifying where the IOS to be loaded is (TFTP)
    boot system flash <filename>                            -> Set a boot command in the startup-config specifying where the IOS to be loaded is (flash)
    boot system rom                                         -> load the ROMMON OS

RECAP:
    Each remote site has a LAN switch connected to a router. The router connects the LAN to a WAN providing access to other remote sites
    UTP (ethernet) cabling connects machines to a switch and a switch to a router. The router is connected to CSU/DSU through a serial cable which connects to the serial port on the router
    A leased line (or other WAN technology) then connects the CSU/DSU at one site to the CSU/DSU at another, an RJ48 cable is used to connected the telco's leased line to the CSU/DSU
    Most modern routers have the CSU/DSU built into their serial interface, in this case an RJ48 cable is connected to the routers Serial port instead of a serial cable

INSTALLATION
    1. connect LAN cables (ethernet, RJ45)
    2. connected serial interface to CSU/DSU (serial cable)
    3. connect CSU/DSU to line from telco (RJ48)
    4. connect console port to laptop (for configuration)
    5. connect power cable
    6. power on the router (Note that switches don't usually have a power button and will always be on once connected to power)

CABLE CONNECTION TO INTERNET
    To connect a home or office LAN (SOHO) to the internet using cable has the high speed internet service
    The router is connected to a cable modem with UTP (stright through) cabling the modem is then connected to the CATV cable line provided by the ISP
    An alternative to using CATV (TV) cable is to use DSL (Telephone) which will require a DSL modem
    Modern home routers will include all of the following as a single device 1. Router 2. Switch 3. Cable/DSL modem 4. Voice adapter 5. Wireless adapter 6. Hardware enabled encryption

SIMILAR OPERATIONS ON CISCO SWITCH CLI AND CISCO ROUTER CLI

    1.  Enable privileged and global configuration mode
    2.  Configure console, Telnet and enable secret passwords
    3.  Configure SSH keys and user/password
    4.  Configure hostname
    5.  Configure speed and duplex mode on Ethernet interfaces
    6.  Configure interface descriptions
    7.  Setting interfaces up and down (shutdown and no shutdown)
    8.  Selecting interfaces (i.e. line console 0 and interface vlan 1)
    9.  CLI help
    10. startup-config, running-config and copy command
    11. Starting set-up mode (reload router with empty startup config or use setup command)

DIFFERENT OPERATIONS ON CISCO SWITCHES AND CISCO ROUTERS

    1. Configuration of IP addresses
    2. Questions asked during setup
    3. Routers have an additional AUX port (connects to external modem) allowing remote users to connect tot eh router for configuration
    4. show mac address-table dynamic replaced by show ip route (since routers focus on IP routes rather than mac addresses)

ROUTER INTERFACES

    commands to view interface informations:
      1. show ip interface brief
      2. show protocols <interface type> <interface number>
      3. show interfaces <interface type> <interface number>

    1. ETHERNET
        a. 10 Mbps -> interface Ethernet 0 or 0/1 or 1/0/1 (the interface number format depends on the cisco switch)
        b. 100 Mbps -> interface FastEthernet 0/1
        c. 1+ Gbps -> interface GigabiteEthernet 0/1

    2. SERIAL
        Point to point (PPP), High Level Data Link (HDLC) and Frame relay both use the same layer 1 standards
        the network engineer choose which of these link layer protocols to use on the serial interface (default HDLC)

    3. AUX PORT
        Connects to an external analog modem through a RJ45 straight through cable
        An engineer can then use a terminal emulator to connect to and configure the router
        The AUX port can be selected and configured with the "line aux 0" command

INTERFACE STATUS CODES

    Each interface will have a status of the form up/up or down/down or up/down
      - The first status (line status) code refers to if the Layer 1 is working
      - The second status (protocol status) code refers to if the Link Layer protocol (Layer 2) is working
    If the first status code is down then the second will always be down since the link layer protocol can't work with out layer 1

    Line status checks that a cable is installed, that it is the right cable (cross over cable) and that the device on the other end is powered on
    protocol status will usually be down if there is a mismatch between the datalink layer configurations (i.e. spedd/duple, one router using PPP and one using HDLC)

    if an interface is shutdown using the shutdown command it will be marked as administratively down/down instead of just down/down

    administratively down/down    -> interface shutdown by administrator
    down/down                     -> layer 1 is down
    up/down                       -> link layer is down (protocol mismatch)
    up/up                         -> all is well

ROUTER INTERFACE IP ADDRESS

    Routers MUST have an IP address configured on all  in use interfaces
    If an address is not configured, even if the interface is in up/up state, the router will not attempt to send and receive packets on that interface

    To configure an IP address on an interface
        1. select the interface interface <interface type> <interface number>
        2. ip address <address> <mask>

BANDWIDTH AND CLOCK-RATE ON WAN LINKS (SERIAL INTERFACES)

    WAN links can run at a wide range of speeds. to deal with this routers slave themselves to the speed dictated by the CSU/DSU (clocking)
    The CS/DSU sends clock pulses to the router telling it when to send and receive the next bit
    This means the routers don't need to auto-negotiate to determine the link speed

    BACK-TO-BACK CONFIGURATION
        When routers are connected back-to-back (i.e. serial concole of router one connects directly to serial console of router 2) they do not use CSU/DSU
        instead one router provides the clocking and the other behaves as if it where connected to a CSU/DSU using the clock speed provided by the first router
        To set the clock rate in this configuration
            1. select the serial interface on the first router (the one connected to the DCE cable)
            2. use the "clock rate <speed>" command to set the clocking (usually 128000 bps)
        Note we can use the "show controllers" command to determine if the attached serial cable is a DCE or DTE
        Cisco ISO silently rejects the clock rate commmand if the interface is connected to a DTE cable (no error is shown)

    BANDWIDTH COMMAND
        The "bandwidth" command specifies the spped of the link on a serial interface (in kbps)
        The command does not affect the rate at which bits are sent or received on the link (clocking). instead affects the operation of routing protocols such as EIGRP and OSPF
        For Serial links the default bandwidth is 1.544 Mbps (speed of a T1 line)
        For Ethernet interfaces the bandwidth is equal to the speed the interface is running at (i.e. 100 Mbps for FastEthernet)

SETUP MODE

    - Can reach setup mode by erasing the startup config and rebooting the router or by using the "setup" command in enabled mode
    - When completed write the setup to both the startup config  and the running config
    - We can use ctrl-C to exit setup mode
    - When complete we can enter (0): ignore answers (1): restart setup (2): use the setup configuartion
    - The setup mode on a router asks different questions to that of a switch

UPGRADING CISCO IOS

    - The IOS image is stored in flash memory (rewritable permanent storage)
    - To upgrade the IOS, a new IOS is copied into flash memory, the router is configured to boot with this new image and the older image is then deleted from flash memory
        1. download the new IOS image from cisco.com
        2. place the IOS image on a TFTP server accessible from the router
        3. Use the "copy" command to copy the file into flash memory
            - "copy tftp flash"
            - you will then be prompted to enter the address of the tftp server and the name of the file on the server

    - We need to reboot the router in order to use the new IOS
        1. The router performs an power on self test (POST) to confirm the hardware is working correctly
        2. The bootstrap program is copied from ROM to RAM
        3. The bootstrap program picks one of the IOS images and loads it into RAM, then hands control over to the new OS
        4. The IOS loads the startup configuration file from NVRAM to RAM as the running-config

    CONFIGURATION REGISTER
        16 bit register which specifies some low level operations of the cisco router (default value: 0x2102)
            - 9600 baud rate of the console is set using the configuration register
            - Also used to specify the OS which is loaded during boot
            - config-register 0x2100 global config command causes the router to load the ROMMON OS (used to recover lost passwords, stored in ROM)
            - The config register value does not need to be saved to the startup-config
            - we can check the configuration register value using the "show version" command

        the forth hex digit of the configuration register specifies which OS to boot
            - 0   -> ROMMON (older cisoc routers use RxBoot)
            - 1   -> first IOS found in flash memory
            - 2-F -> Try each boot system commands in the startup-config in order until one works, if none work use the first IOS in flash memory

        The "boot system" global configuration command is used to create boot commands in the startup-config
            - can be used multiple times
            - Gives details about flash memory to help locate the IOS

        Note that an IOS image can be copied into flash using the ROMMON OS in case we delete all the IOS images in flash
        ROMMON will be loaded if no other IOS can be loaded


SHOW VERSION COMMAND:

    1. The configuration register’s current and future setting (if different)
    2. The IOS version
    3. The uptime
    4. The reason for the last reload of IOS
    5. The source from which the router loaded the current IOS
    6. The amount of RAM memory
    7. The number and types of interfaces
    8. The amount of NVRAM memory
    9. The amount of Flash memory
